Improve first chapter (#27)
0xAX/asm: content/asm_1.md

Since these posts described assembly for the Linux `x86_64`, the following registers have the following meanings:

- `rax` - In most cases could be used as a temporary register to store a temporary value. In a case of call of a [system call](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_call) it must contain the number of the system call.
- `rdi` - Used to pass `1st` argument to a function.
- `rsi` - Used to pass `2nd` argument to a function.

> - `rdx` - Used to pass `3rd` argument to a function.

Author: fixed

Now we can understand that the first four lines of the assembly code basically do the two following things:

- Specify the number of the system call (the `sys_write` in our example) that we are going to call.
- Specify the arguments of the `sys_write` system call.

Check the system call table we can know that the `sys_write` system call has the number - `1`. Since the `rax` register should contain the number of the system call that we are going to call, we put `1` into it. After this we put `1` to the `rdi` register. That will be the first argument of the `sys_write`. In our case we want to write the `hello world` string in the terminal, so we put `1` which specifies [standard output](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams). The next step is to prepare the second argument of the `sys_write` system call. In our case we pass the address of the `msg` constant to the `rsi` register. At the last but not least step we should specify the length of data we want to write. The length of the `hello, world!` string is `13` bytes, so we pass it to the `rdx` register.

> As all parameters of the `sys_write` system call is ready, now we can to call the system call itself. It could be done with the `syscall` instruction. That already should print the `hello, world!` string in our terminal. But if you will build and run only these instructions, you will see the [segmentation fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Segmentation_fault) error. The problem is that we need to exit properly from the program. To do that, we have to call the `sys_exit` system call. We need to do the same - fill the `rax` with the number of the `sys_exit` system call and fill the respective registers with the parameters needed for this system call. Let's take a look at the system call [table](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As all parameters of the `sys_write` system call are ready, we can now call the system itself. We can do it with the `syscall` instruction that should already print the `hello, world!` string in our terminal. However, if you build and run only these instructions, you will see the [segmentation fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Segmentation_fault) error. The problem is that we need to exit properly from the program. To do that, we have to call the `sys_exit` system call. We need to do the same - fill the `rax` with the number of the `sys_exit` system call and fill the respective registers with the parameters for this system call. Let's take a look at the [system call table](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl):
```

Reviewer: ```if you build and run only these instructions```

what instructions?

```
60	common	exit			sys_exit
```

> We may see that the number of this system call is `60`, so we put this value into the `rax` register. According to the [exit](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/exit.2.html) documentation, this system call expects to get a single argument which is a exit status code. We expect that our program terminates successfully let's just put `0` to the `rdi` register. Our program is ready. Now let's build our program with the following commands:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system call number is `60`, so we load it into the `rax` register. The [exit](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/exit.2.html) docs say it needs one argument: an exit status code. To indicate success, we put `0` in the `rdi` register. That’s it — our program is ready! Let’s build it with these commands:
```

```bash
nasm -f elf64 -o hello.o hello.asm
ld -o hello hello.o
```

> After this we should have an executable file named `hello`. Let's execute it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we should have an executable file named `hello`. Let's run it:
```

```
60	common	exit			sys_exit
```

The system call number is `60`, so we load it into the `rax` register. The [exit](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/exit.2.html) docs say it needs one argument: an exit status code. To indicate success, we put `0` in the `rdi` register. That’s it — our program is ready! Let’s build it with these commands:

```bash
nasm -f elf64 -o hello.o hello.asm

> ld -o hello hello.o

Reviewer: Should we explain these commands?

```

> Now we should have an executable file named `hello`. Let's run it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we should have an executable file named `hello`. Let's run it:
```

```bash
./hello
hello, world!
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

If everything is set up correctly, you will see this output in the terminal:

```bash
hello, world!```

```

section .data
```

The `text` section contains instructions for the program. Every program is a set of instructions that tell the computer how to perform a specific task. The assembly program is no different. But before a computer starts to execute a program, it should know where to start from. The beginning of the execution starts from the program's [entry point](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entry_point). The name of such entry point is usually `_start`. The entry point is set by a special program called **linker** during the building process of a program. The building of a source code to a ready-to-run program consists of two parts:

- Compilation to an [object file](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Object_file).
- Building an executable from the object files with a [linker](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linker_(computing)).

A linker sets the entry point in the resulted executable file. That is why we must specify the entry point in the `text` section of our program so that the linker can find it. The entry point symbol must be defined as `global` so that the symbol `_start` is visible to the linker.

See the example:

```assembly
;; Definition of the text section
section .text

> ;; Mark the `_start` symbol as global so it is visible to the linker

Reviewer: ```suggestion
;; Mark the `_start` symbol as global so that it is visible to the linker
```

global _start

;; Definition of the program entry point
_start:
```

> [!NOTE]
> You don't have to name the entry point `_start`. You can overwrite it using the `-e <symbol-name>` option of the [GNU ld linker](https://sourceware.org/binutils/docs/ld/), but we will not use this option in our programs.

Now that we know how to define the basic sections of our first assembly program, we can look at the first instructions.

Every NASM assembly source code line contains some combination of the following four fields:

```
[label:] instruction [operands] [; comment]
```

Fields specified in square brackets are optional. A basic `instruction` usually consists of two parts:

- Name of the instruction
- Optional operands of the instruction

If you already have experience with one of the high-level programming languages, you can compare instruction and operands to a function and its parameters. For example, let's take a look at the following assembly line. Here we can see the instruction `mov` and the operands `count` and `48` used by the instruction:

```assembly

> ; Put value 48 in the count variable
> mov count, 48

Reviewer: ```suggestion
; Put value 48 in the register variable
mov rax, 48
```

```assembly
;; Definition of the `data` section
section .data
    ;; String `msg` variable with the value `hello world!`
    msg db      "hello, world!"

;; Definition of the text section
section .text
    ;; Reference to the entry point of our program
    global _start

;; Entry point
_start:
    ;; Specify the number of the system call (1 is `sys_write`).
    mov     rax, 1
    ;; Set the first argument of `sys_write` to 1 (`stdout`).
    mov     rdi, 1
    ;; Set the second argument of `sys_write` to the reference of the `msg` variable.
    mov     rsi, msg
    ;; Set the third argument to the length of the `msg` variable's value (13 bytes).
    mov     rdx, 13

    ;; Call the `sys_write` system call.
    syscall
    ;; Specify the number of the system call (60 is `sys_exit`).
    mov    rax, 60
    ;; Set the first argument of `sys_exit` to `0`. The `0` status code is success.
    mov    rdi, 0
    ;; Call the `sys_exit` system call.
    syscall
```

This may look quite long compared to the "Hello, World!" program written using a high-level programming language. Let’s break it down and understand how it works.

> ### Program's sections definition

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Defining sections
```

Have a look at the first four lines of the program. At the beginning we defined the `data` section and specified the `msg` variable with the `hello, world!` value. Now we can use it in the program's code.

Next is the declaration of the `text` section and the `_start` entry point of the program. After running the program, it starts from the `_start` line.

> ### Basics of CPU registers and System Call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### CPU registers and system calls
```

After defining the program's sections, we can move to the actual code of the program. The first four lines after section definitions start from the `mov` instruction to place specific values into registers. This instruction expects two operands and puts the value of the second operand in the first one. But what are these `rax`, `rdi`, and `rsi`? We can read in the Wikipedia:

> A central processing unit (CPU) is the hardware within a computer that carries out the instructions of a computer program by performing the basic arithmetical, logical, and input/output operations of the system.

> A CPU executes different operations on data. But where does it store data? While the [main memory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_memory) is an obvious choice, accessing it is relatively slow. Reading and storing data in main memory slows down the operations because it involves complicated steps to send data requests through the control bus. To speed things up, the CPU uses small, fast storage locations called **general-purpose registers**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A CPU executes different operations on data. But where is data stored? While the [main memory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_memory) is an obvious choice, accessing it is relatively slow. Reading and storing data in the main memory slows down the operations because it involves complicated steps to send data requests through the control bus. To speed things up, the CPU uses small, fast storage locations called **general-purpose registers**.
```

- `rax` - used to store temporary values. In the case of a [system call](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_call), it should store the system call number.
- `rdi` - used to pass the first argument to a function.
- `rsi` - used to pass the second argument to a function.
- `rdx` - used to pass the third argument to a function.

> There are more details related to the Linux `x86_64` calling conventions, but the description above should be enough for now. Knowing how these registers work, we can return to the code. What do we need to write a "Hello, World!" program? Usually, we just pass a `hello world` string to a library function like [printf](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printf). But these functions typically come from the [standard library](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_library) of the programming language we are using. Assembly doesn’t have a standard library. What should we do in this case? Well, we have at least two options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are more details related to the Linux `x86_64` calling conventions, but the description above should be enough for now. Knowing how these registers are used, we can return to the code. What do we need to write a "Hello, World!" program? Usually, we just pass a `hello world` string to a library function like [printf](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Printf). But these functions typically come from the [standard library](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_library) of the programming language we are using. Assembly doesn’t have a standard library. What should we do in this case? Well, we have at least two options:
```

```
1	common	write			sys_write
```

You can learn more about Linux system calls in [manual pages](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/syscalls.2.html). To learn more about the `sys_write` system call, run the following command in the terminal:

```bash
man 2 write
```

The manual page shows the following function:

```C
ssize_t write(int fd, const void buf[.count], size_t count);
```

This function is a wrapper around the `sys_write` system call provided by the standard C library. Usually, the arguments of the system call and the wrapper function are the same. So we can assume that the `sys_write` system call is defined like this:

```C
ssize_t sys_write(unsigned int fd, const char *buf, size_t count);
```

The function expects three arguments:

-  `fd` - The file descriptor that specifies where to write data.

> -  `buf` - The pointer to the buffer from which data is sent to the output.
> -  `count` - The number of bytes to write from the buffer to the file specified by the file descriptor in the first argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  `buf` - The pointer to the buffer from which data will be written to the file specified by `fd`.
-  `count` - The number of bytes that will be written from the buffer to the file specified by `fd`.
```

Now we can understand that the first four lines of the assembly code do two things:

- Specify the number of the system call (the `sys_write` in our example) that we will call.
- Specify the arguments of the `sys_write` system call.

By checking the system call table, we know the `sys_write` system call has the number `1`. Since the `rax` register should contain the system call number, we put `1` into it. Then, we put `1` in the `rdi` register. That will be the first argument of `sys_write`. We want to write the `hello world` string in the terminal, so we put `1` which specifies the [standard output](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_streams).

The next step is to prepare the second argument of the `sys_write` system call. In our case, we pass the address of the `msg` variable to the `rsi` register. Last but not least, we should specify the length of data we want to write. The length of the `hello, world!` string is `13` bytes, so we pass it to the `rdx` register.

> As we already prepared all the parameters of the `sys_write` system call, we can now call the system call itself. We can do it with the `syscall` instruction which will print the `"hello, world!"` string in our terminal. However, if you build and run the program having only the `sys_write` system call, you will see the [segmentation fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Segmentation_fault) error. The problem is that we need to exit properly from the program. To do that, we have to call the `sys_exit` system call and fill the registers with the needed values. Fill the `rax` with the number of the `sys_exit` system call and the respective registers with the parameters for this system call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we already prepared all the parameters of the `sys_write` system call, we can now execute the system call itself. We can do it with the `syscall` instruction which will print the `"hello, world!"` string in our terminal. However, if you build and run the program having only the `sys_write` system call, you will see the [segmentation fault](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Segmentation_fault) error. The problem is that we need to exit properly from the program. To do that, we have to execute the `sys_exit` system call and fill the registers with the needed values. Fill the `rax` with the number of the `sys_exit` system call and the respective registers with the parameters for this system call.
```

Let's take a look at the [system call table](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/arch/x86/entry/syscalls/syscall_64.tbl):

```
60	common	exit			sys_exit
```

> The system call number for `sys_exit` is `60`, so we load `60` into the `rax` register. The [exit](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/exit.2.html) docs say it needs a single argument: the exit status code. To indicate that the program executed successfully, we put `0` into the `rdi` register (exit status `0` means success). That’s it — our program is now ready to exit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The system call number for `sys_exit` is `60`, so we put `60` into the `rax` register. The `exit` function [manual page](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/exit.2.html) states that the `exit` function expects a single argument: the exit status code. To indicate that the program executed successfully, we put `0` into the `rdi` register (exit status `0` means success). That’s it — our program is now ready to exit.
```

> ### Building and running our first assembly program

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Building and running the program
```
